Do not be quick to take offense as an example of a prohibition found in God's word.
Prohibitions typically begin with the words do not, or you must not.
Well, how should we view prohibitions found in Jehovah's Word?
There really a glimpse into his personality and his loving care for us.
For instance, a loving parent at times provides prohibitions to his children.
Don't play with fire.
Don't play in the railroad tracks.
Don't throw stones at your brother or sister.
Why?
For the child's protection and well-being and for the protection of others.
Similarly, our loving father, Jehovah, often provides prohibitions in his word
to help us spiritually, emotionally, and physically.
We might view a prohibition as a do not enter sign
to an area that's full of landmines.
Well, sadly, the inclination, the tendency of imperfect, curious humans is to test the prohibitions.
We might say, but the field of landmines is a shortcut to my destination,
or there's a delicious fruit tree in that field.
Well, Adam and Eve bypassed a do not enter sign for that very reason,
and it didn't turn out so well for them, or for their offspring.
And sadly, we've inherited the desire to test prohibitions.
Well, if we ever think that we can bypass a prohibition and avoid the landmines, the consequences,
then it's good for us to look behind the prohibition, the restriction,
and meditate on what Jehovah is trying to teach us.
Let's do that with two of the prohibitions found in Ecclesiastes chapter 7 today.
The first one is in our day text, and there it says,
do not be quick to take offense.
For the taking of offense lodges in the bosom fools.
Well, what does it mean to take offense?
It seems obvious.
Other Bible translations use the expressions to be angry, to be indignant, to be vexed.
So what is Jehovah here asking us to do?
Is Jehovah saying that we should never be offended by anything or anyone
that we should forgive all offenses, regardless of how severe or frequent they are?
No.
Clearly, there are grievous sins that cannot be ignored in our relationship with others.
But what is Jehovah saying to us?
He's essentially saying, imitate my qualities.
I am slow to anger.
I am slow to be offended.
He's telling you and me, demonstrate the fruitage of my spirit.
Show self-control. Think this situation through. Don't explode.
Now, there's a multitude of reasons why we could become offended,
and how easy it is for us to be emotionally charged.
If someone insults us or questions our motives,
if our suggestion on a project isn't received well,
or it could be something as simple as when someone doesn't greet us the way that we would like them to.
And COVID has complicated matters further.
A handshake, a hug, fist bump, elbow bump.
Sometimes we don't know what to do.
Well, what can help if we are inclined to become offended?
Proverbs 1911 says, the insight of a man certainly slows down his anger.
And it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.
So insight can help us to give the person the benefit of the doubt.
Maybe he or she was deep in thought.
Just received bad news.
Is hungry, is tired, is grieving, is injured.
The list can go on and on. We can give them the benefit of the doubt.
If we can let it go, we should let it go.
Well, why is Jehovah telling us to avoid the land of mine of taking offense?
What could happen if we take offense quickly?
Well, we could develop a bad reputation if it happens regularly.
But there's something even worse.
Proverbs 1417 says, the one who is quick to anger acts foolishly.
So it's not just getting heated up, but it's acting in response to that.
If we confront every perceived wrong done to us,
we could harm ourselves or the other person either physically or emotionally.
Is there a Bible example that illustrates that?
Well, a marginal reference to today's text at the end of verse 9 is Genesis 4.5.
Let's go there.
Genesis 4.
And we'll start by reading verse 3.
Get the context here.
Genesis chapter 4 verse 3 says,
After some time, Cain brought some fruits of the land as an offering to Jehovah,
but Abel brought some firstlings of his flock, including their fat.
While Jehovah looked with favor on Abel and on his offering,
he did not look with any favor on Cain and on his offering.
So Cain grew hot with anger and was dejected.
Cain quickly became offended.
He grew hot with anger.
In spite of Jehovah's subsequent warning,
he exploded with rage and killed his brother, sadly.
What was it that quickly offended Cain?
Because of Abel's faith, he offered a sacrifice of greater value than that of Cain.
Abel was simply giving his own personal best to Jehovah
and Cain quickly took offense.
Is there a lesson for us?
Well, there's no need to become heated up when a fellow believer outshines us,
either here at Bethel or in the congregation.
And there's certainly no place for character assassination.
That is defaming another person in order to make oneself look better.
We're all working toward the same goal.
We're all trying to give Jehovah the honor and praise that he deserves.
Let's not look at a related prohibition found in the same chapter of Ecclesiastes.
This time, verses 21 and 22.
There it says, also, do not take to heart every word that people say.
Otherwise, you may hear your servant calling down evil on you.
For you well know in your heart that many times you yourself have called down evil on others.
This is another land mine that Jehovah is trying to protect us from by saying do not.
Don't go there.
As an education to Bible students and all of us,
the Enjoy Life Forever book asks the following question,
how can these verses help you to keep from overreacting when someone speaks negatively about you?
What is Jehovah teaching us in these verses?
What is he asking us to do?
Jehovah is essentially saying imitate my qualities.
I'm willing to pardon thoughtless speech.
How about you? Are you willing to do the same?
It's like he's reminding you and me.
Keep a balanced view of your brothers and sisters.
Don't expect perfection of them.
Remember that you two are imperfect.
Well, why is Jehovah telling us to avoid this land mine?
Because it can lead to problems.
He knows that we're setting ourselves up for disappointment if we expect perfection
of our brothers and sisters.
It has the potential to stumble us or shipwreck our faith.
And James 3.8 reminds us no human can tame the tongue.
It is unruly and injurious full of deadly poison.
Furthermore, as Ecclesiastes 7.22 indicates,
we each have that venomous instrument in our own head.
And we certainly have said things that we regret.
Well, I know I have at least.
Is there a Bible example that illustrates the harm that can come
by taking to heart negative talk?
Again, a marginal reference to verse 21 is 1 Samuel 24 verse 9.
1 Samuel 24 verse 9.
And here we see a dialogue between King Saul and David.
David had an opportunity to injure Saul, but he did not.
Notice the conversation.
It's 1 Samuel 24 verse 9.
David said to Saul, why do you listen to the words of men who say,
look, David is seeking to harm you.
Saul was giving his heart to lies about David's motives and actions.
Why?
Because Saul sadly was obsessed with his own reputation.
He was seeking justification for ill will toward David so he believed lies.
What is the lesson for us?
We must avoid the landmine of taking to heart negative talk about us.
Instead, we can find joy knowing that Jehovah is the one who examines us and approves us.
So what have we considered?
Jehovah provides prohibitions for our benefit.
As we do our best to avoid the landmines of quickly taking offense,
taking to heart negative talk,
we will benefit ourselves and others around us and find joy in our service to Jehovah.